Transcription of the video available from the [internet archive](https://archive.org/details/semente-spiral-shaped-communities) or [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cjYhaq-wibQ) about the development of semente. Video made on 27.11.2024. This is an automated transcription, and was edited slightly.

---

Hi, this is Felipe from Reuse City and many other projects. I want to talk about *semente*, the community toolkit that I'm developing with two colleagues, and the way that it is right now. 

What we've been developing and the kind of thing that we understand is important in this kind of setting - there are some conceptual points that I'll try to make. But also some more concrete ways to visualize projects that I think may be useful for anybody who is developing projects connected to communities. And that feels kind of uncomfortable in shaping projects in a particular kind of limited way that we see in many funding opportunities.

The idea is to help develop projects in a different way. So yeah, I'll get to it right now.

One of the first aspects, or perhaps the most important one that we want to tackle with *semente*, is a limited version or a limited understanding of what projects are. It's often very complicated to talk with communities about projects when there is an external funding body or an external partner that comes and only sees a fraction of time. They lose sight of the more cyclical and circular nature of things.

From many, many projects that I've been involved with, I've learned that when you're talking about communities and the sustained thriving of communities over time, it's important to take into account the cyclical nature, you know, of seasons, of days and nights, of the cycles of the moon.

All of this inspired the way communities understand themselves and talk about themselves, and I had other videos talking about the spiral shape that I'm trying to put into my research and my other projects. But here in *semente* we're trying to do something more concrete in the sense of creating ways to visualize projects and collective processes that takes into account that and identifies or gives a bit more density in the way communities understand themselves over time.

So what we're trying to do is to depart from this kind of linear vision of projects. That would be something like, you know, you start by defining who is your audience. And to define your audience, you define also what are your goals. And with the goals, you have to define also your expected outcomes or expected results that would be at the end of the project, and then you define a methodology.

What else - there is the timeline, the passing of time as a straight linear arrow. This is one shape that I see as rather problematic. But this is more or less what would be the usual way of describing projects - you have an audience that would be a target public, a group of people, or it can be even your own group.

There are the goals, that is what do you and what does this group want to do, and even that to me is sometimes problematic. Because often it is about what you and your small group want to do on behalf of a group of people, of a community, or to impact a group of people of our community. And I think we can debate if that is a good way to frame things. I don't think it is.

And then you define your methodologies and how you do things over time and what are your expected results, and here you can add how to measure, how to demonstrate impact. But then this would be a kind of straight linear arrow of project development and project organizing, and to me this is not the way that things actually happen in community settings. And this is not the way that I develop my projects.

I don't affiliate to any particular methodology. I have read a lot about circular participatory iterative methods, and I find that most of them have their own limitations.

So three years ago - two years ago we started developing *semente*, and the story is documented elsewhere so I won't go too much into it. But it's based on years of experiments and collective processes in online settings and in local settings.

And the idea with *semente* is to try to distill that into a way of visualizing and understanding projects that make sense to a lot of people. We are in a very intense period now of shaping *semente*, trying to get what we have done in these last years - two years of experimentation and development. And trying to make it a bit more reflective of the ideas that we want to impart in the method.

So what we're trying to do with *semente* is to have this different understanding of a project shape, how a project should be depicted over time. So instead of having this straight linear arrow from the project, which is always in our experience is hard to decide when it started. Because there are always things that come from before and that were built over time, and you know ultimately if it wasn't for humanity developing culture over thousands or even more years, we wouldn't have any kind of project.

So it's always interesting to pay attention to what came before. So we are trying to do a spiral shaped understanding of projects. And right now at this point, the way that we are understanding *semente* right now is that this is the heart of a spiral, but it's not in the sense that it will evolve from the center outwards.

The idea is that we have three action vectors in the way we see the projects evolving. One would be what I call seeding, and I think I'll get back to it. Then the second one would be handling or tending or caring, and the third one would be regenerating.

So this would be three ways or three different moments in project development the way I see these things happening in my practice. But again it's not about a spiral that starts from the center and outwards, but rather a kind of cyclical way of understanding project moments.

And in this particular configuration there are a lot of elements that may refer to things that we see in traditional ways of depicting projects. For instance, we have goals and we have an audience, and I put this here at the center. Then we have methodology and I put here at handling or tending or caring or project development you could call it.

And expected results I will put here towards the end, but I have different names for that. So everything that is here at the center I will call seeds. We're trying to find the best way, so it could be a seed bank or a seed bag.

But the idea is that at the center of what we're trying to do is the combination between desires of people and the understanding and the sense of belonging, the sense of identity that this particular group of people has. Always, always reminding that we see and we try to develop *semente* as a community toolkit, a toolkit to create and improve on community projects.

So it's always this combination. We see the seeds as the combination between groups of people and their desires. The other element here that is interesting to think about are the expected results, and to me a very important distinction has to be made between what a particular community has as their own goal and the kind of results that they can show to external bodies - to funders, to partners, to the government, to society.

So I would put here - and as we are in *semente* - I didn't mention it in this video but I think if you've seen anything, if you read anything else about *semente* elsewhere, you know that we use a lot of kind of botanical garden and permaculture metaphors.

So expected results to me would be fruits. And what is interesting of making this distinction is that the fruits are not the goal of the community, the fruits are not the goal of an ecosystem. The fruits are a tool - I won't use tools because I will use it elsewhere - but the fruits are one aspect of what is the collective construction that is performed by this particular community or this ecosystem.

And then I will very broadly here think of methodology as tools in this case. Here the passing of time would be this cycle, so the timeline would always be a cyclical nature.

But we have some particularly interesting ways of understanding community projects here that are not to be seen on straight linear ways of defining projects. The first is that there is something that I didn't put on the straight line but it's important to any project - resources.

And to me resources are not only - you know of course we need to raise funds, we need to bring, and especially in community projects and nonprofits and society and social innovation projects, we often have to secure funds from outside and bring funds in.

But there is this understanding also that I think it's not a surprise that we have to understand resources not only in terms of money that we acquire from outside, but also the things that we already have - so the knowledge, the experience, the availability, the community exchange. A lot of resources that are available for projects that are not restricted to money and economic funds or infrastructure or kind of physical infrastructure.

And I put resources here in our visualization of *semente* in this position. This is a very interesting position because it's a combination of things that we are starting and things that are returning.

And I'll talk a bit more about it, but in *semente* we call that soil. Soil as the more concrete conditions of projects happening, and there is also - you know exploring here our metaphors and our analogies.

We have the seeds that are this combination of what is our community, what our stakeholders and their desires are. And we have the human activity of connecting the seeds or putting the seeds onto the soil.

So this is the first action vector - is seeding when you get the seeds that we carry from before, that are kind of evolving memory of this community. And we put this seed into soil, so when we decide that these desires of this community will be planted, will create an attempt at transforming those seeds into new production.

And here in this visualization we can also see that if we think of this spiral evolving over time - and again this is a kind of bi-dimensional visualization. But it's important also to think of this evolving over time because things on spirals never come back to the same point.

So this is not only a cycle, but it's also something that evolves over time. So it would be for instance - let me take another piece of paper. Yeah never mind this drawing, we just go through it.

So have this shape that I was trying to explore there. Here right, goes comes here then comes back but if you see it from the side we start here the seeds. We will kind of do the seeding and then we will go up with tending and caring and paying attention to things, and then at some point it will cross again and you'll get back to a new beginning.

And here we do the same kind of movement. So go up and it comes back, go up and it comes back. That's only to say that we see the passing of time in this direction.

It is not - so we can try to see that as a third dimension. So we could try to depict that as a straight arrow but the idea is to understand that there is this cyclical nature, this spiraled way of things evolving over time.

So coming back here we saw that the first vector is seeding, the second is managing, handling, caring, tending. And the third one would be regeneration.

But what happens here is that for instance when you talk about project prototypes, that is what happens when you start seeding. In *semente* I can call them sprouts, and our seeds start sprouting, start growing, but we still need to take care of them.

Then we have here at the tending phase, there is a lot that we need to pay attention to. For instance, if there are changes in weather - and you can predict some of them, but others we need to act according to things that happen.

And weather would be all the external elements that are out of our direct control. In the case of community projects, it could be about changes in the political scenario, changes in the funding horizon, changes in election results or even more directly related to weather, you know, when there are disasters and things that change outside of our reach and have an impact on our project.

These are things that we need to also take care during the tending and caring vector. Then there is one particular element that I found recently in trying to evolve these analogies, that is the idea of blossoming.

Blossoming are those elements of our projects that we show to the world but are not necessarily productive in the sense of generating fruits. But they are important - they help the project to be seen, they help the project to attract potential partners, and then we could call that also pollination.

So when our flowers start showing to the world, we have the pollination happening. There is, you know, things that come to help transform these flowers into fruits.

When the fruits are generated, we have other interesting dynamics to think about that also echo of this - these references coming from small farming and permaculture and forestry. Our fruits can be seen as the concrete outputs of our collective action, and the fruits would be for instance reports, products, whatever publications, videos.

Kind of more quantifiable outcomes of our collective processes. But we can decide, as in any of this - you know by using these analogies, we can decide that some of the fruits we will send to the market to be sold.

We have our consumers, our customers, we want our products to generate exchange with people outside of the system in the market. But also there are some fruits that we will save for ourselves, and we will do that for a number of reasons - to feed our own community.

But also to ensure that we are generating new seeds for the future. And here we are using the image of the silo. So the silo is after we've kind of - we at - we're at after the end of this process of caring and tending.

It's never an end because we need to maintain care for the soil even after we have harvested. And here there's another element that is harvest - is how we transform the fruits into potential products.

So the movement from the fruits to the market comes from the harvest, but then the silo is where we keep our seeds, where we keep our products. Where we keep things that we want to maintain for the future.

And this is particularly in this context of community projects something that is very seldom accounted for. What often happens is that the projects will shape their own vocabulary, their own self-image in their own description influenced by what funders recognize as valuable.

They will shape their own existence focused particularly on fruits, and to me it's very interesting to think that communities and community actions, community projects should shape themselves as this continuous effort of generating the sustained health of the community, of the seeds over time.

There's also another element here that has relationship with the passing of time. Just as you know the silo is where we keep our principles, where we keep the things that we've learned that will bring to other projects.

Where we connect our production to the soil and we care, we tend for the soil on the long term. But also there is another element that are the things that we cannot decide, things that we still need more time to evolve, we need more elements.

We need to discuss more, we need to wait for things to change outside of our community, and we call that the composting. Not the compost - I mean, not the fertilizer generated by the contact of different nutrients of organic matter.

So it's not the object of the compost because that would be already integrated in the soil somehow when we do these movements. But the idea of the process of composting - and here in community projects are the things that we still need to discuss more.

Or we still need to wait and we put it in the composting bin. I think this basically covers - I think there are some more elements that I could even go further into these analogies.

There are for instance the commons - how do we ensure that our own community collaborates with others. So we don't need to exchange only in the market, we can exchange with the commons.

But this is the basic, the center of the *semente* methodology so far. So I do understand that it's still very complex and to my sensibility, this video that I'm producing right now - it's much more an exercise in documenting it for ourselves.

For the *semente* team, how these elements are at play over time but in any case... Yeah, this is just the start of a conversation. We are trying to create easier ways to understand and to explain.

To understand it ourselves, to develop it further and to explain to other people what the *semente* method can be. But yeah, I guess that the basic idea is to understand that there are these elements and that we are trying to evolve.

From this way of understanding projects to something like this that is kind of cyclical and it always seems to return to one point. But in fact this point is never the same because it will evolve over time, so it has this combination that I find very very productive.

And with a lot of potential - that is when we combine a linear understanding of things evolving over time because it's not about just repeating everything. But this linear understanding is not a straight arrow because it goes and it returns to points that are similar to movements.

And to moments that are similar to previous ones but they aren't exactly the same and so yeah. This is perhaps still extremely complex way of translating the work that we're trying to do with *semente* and yeah.

Thanks if you watch this video to this point thanks and yeah let's keep in touch.